# COVID_impact_on_EMS-Rates_NYC
A data processing project that utilizes open NYC EMS data as well as IRS income data to determine the impact of COVID-19 on non-critical EMS calls in NYC according to income level.
My hypothesis that I set out to test in this project is that the number of non-critical EMS calls during the initial height of the  COVID-19 pandemic in New York City in 2020 is significantly less than the number of non-critical calls for the same period in 2019. I further hypothesized that this discrepancy would be more pronounced in areas of higher average income.
	This project is an analysis of the EMS call data from NYC found in this repository under the name EMS_Incident_Dispatch_Data.tsv.gz and the ratio was calculated from the number of calls April and May of 2020 to the number of non-critical calls in 2019 in the same period. To further this analysis, I introduced another data set- the IRS Average Gross Income data set which can be found in this repository under the name IRS2018.csv.gz. The number of calls per zip code in the specified months of each year was extracted by looking at both the dates of the calls and symptoms to search for the calls that match the criteria. The AGI for each zip code was computed by adding up by multiplying the number of returns per income bracket within that zipcode by the median of the specified income bracket, and then dividing that total by the total number of returns. I portrayed this data as a scatter plot. Each point on the scatter plot represents a zip code. The point's x-coordinate represents the average income of that zip code and the point's y-coordinate represents the ratio of number of non-critical EMS calls in 2020 to the number of non-critical EMS calls in 2019.
	I expected the scatter plot to portray an overall negative correlation between the income and the ratio. The higher the average income was, the lower the expected ratio. Thus there should be some sort of visible negative linear slope.
	In conclusion, my scatterplot definately demonstrates a decreased in non-critical calls overall in April and May of 2020, as opposed to the same time period in 2019. In fact, most of the zipcodes have ratios less than 1. Additionally, there is a slightly negative linear trend of my graph which seems to point to a (small) negative correlation between the income and the ratio of non-critical calls.
	A note: this graph only points to correlation and not causation. There are therefore many questions that can come up in regard to the results of this graph and any conclusions that are derived. For example, the premise of my hypothesis in regard to the negative correlation between income and ratio of non-critical calls is that people with higher income are more likely to re-think using EMS ambulances to be transported to the hospital. It is possible though that the reason the ratio of calls decreased in higher income neighbourhoods is because those people actually left the city to go to their second homes in the suburbs or to stay by family elsewhere- something that people in lower income neighbourhoods don't have the luxury of doing.
